CDC’s Injury Center looks at deaths and nonfatal overdoses for four categories of opioids:

Natural opioids (including morphine and codeine) and semi-synthetic opioids (drugs like oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone)

Methadone, a synthetic opioid

Synthetic opioids other than methadone (drugs like tramadol and fentanyl)

Heroin, an illicit (illegally made) opioid synthesized from morphine that can be a white or brown powder, or a black sticky substance.

What is Rx Opioids?
Can be prescribed for moderate-to-severe pain, after sugery or injusry, or pain from health conditions like cancer.

Includes drugs like hydrocodone (such as Vicodine), oxycodone (such as OxyContin), codeine, and morphine.

Risks include misuse, addiction, overdose, and death, especially with long term use.

When looking at overdose deaths from prescription opioids, CDC analyzes the following:

Natural opioids: Pain medications like morphine and codeine

Semi-synthetic opioids: Pain medications like oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone

Methadone: A synthetic opioid used to treat pain, but it can also be provided through opioid treatment programs to treat opioid use disorders such as Heroin treatment

Current information reported about overdose deaths does not distinguish pharmaceutical fentanyl from illegally-made fentanyl. In order to account for increases in illicitly manufactured fentanyl, CDC Injury Center separates synthetic opioids (other than methadone) from prescription opioid death calculations.



What is Heroin?
An illicit (illegally made) opioid synthesized from morphine that can be a white or brown powder, or a black sticky substance. It is a semi-synthetic drug and highly addictive opioid. Typically injected, but is also smoked and snorted.

Past misuse of prescription opioids is the strongest risk factor for starting heroin use, especially among people who became dependent upon or abused prescription opioids in the past year. 




What is fentanyl?
Pharmaceutical fentanyl is a synthetic opioid pain reliever, approved for treating severe pain, typically advanced cancer pain.1 It is 50 to 100 times more potent than morphine. It is prescribed in the form of transdermal patches or lozenges and can be diverted for misuse and abuse in the United States.

However, most recent cases of fentanyl-related harm, overdose, and death in the U.S. are linked to illegally made fentanyl (IMF).2 It is sold through illegal drug markets for its heroin-like effect. It is often mixed with heroin and/or cocaine as a combination product—with or without the user’s knowledge—to increase its euphoric effects.

References
1 Algren D, Monteilh C, Rubin C, et al. Fentanyl-associated fatalities among illicit drug users in Wayne County, Michigan (July 2005-May 2006). Journal Of Medical Toxicology: Official Journal of the American College Of Medical Toxicology [serial online]. March 2013; 9(1):106-115.

2 Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, DEA Investigative Reporting, January 2015.